Update Smarter Testing docs (#9795)
circleci/circleci-docs: docs/guides/modules/test/pages/smarter-testing.adoc

* Projects with comprehensive test coverage. The more thorough your tests, the more precisely Smarter Testing can identify which tests are impacted by changes.
* Test frameworks with built-in coverage support (Jest, pytest, Go test, Vitest) where generating coverage reports is straightforward.
+
TIP: Smarter Testing uses code coverage data to determine which tests to run when source files are modified. Tests that cover large amounts of the codebase will run more frequently since most source changes will impact those tests.

== Limitations

* Generating code coverage data is essential for determining how tests are related to code. If tests are run in a way that makes generating and accessing code coverage data tricky then Smarter Testing may not be a good fit.

> * Smarter Testing works best when testing a single deployable artifact. For example, a monorepo with integration tests that span multiple packages/services, especially when services run in separate containers, makes coverage generation and consolidation difficult.

Reviewer: "From reading that, I can not tell if that means this feature would work or if I need to condense my tests into one CCI job. Or does it mean that for example if I have unit, integration and e2e all in their own jobs, that would be fine as each job should result in one artifact (so three total)."

> * Smarter Testing works best when testing a single deployable artifact. For example, a monorepo with integration tests that span multiple packages/services, especially when services run in separate containers, makes coverage generation and consolidation difficult.

Reviewer 2: I think the idea of this is more about the difficulty of collecting coverage data of instrumented code running in isolated environments since it requires additional tooling and configuration.

* Scale efficiently as test suites grow.

== How it works
Smarter Testing runs a test suite in three distinct phases:

. Discovering tests.
. Running selected tests.
. Analysing test impact.

Smarter Testing optimizes test suite execution through two features:

* Dynamic test splitting.
* Test impact analysis.

Each feature is described in more detail below.

=== Dynamic test splitting
Dynamic test splitting distributes your tests across parallel execution nodes. The system maintains a shared queue that each node pulls from to create a balanced workload.

> When you configure parallelism in your job and enable Dynamic test splitting, Smarter Testing automatically:

Reviewer: Should we use title case for the feature name ?

> When you configure parallelism in your job and enable Dynamic test splitting, Smarter Testing automatically:

Reviewer 3: This seems to be decided on a case by case basis - Smarter Testing I believe is capitalised. Chunk also. Many other feature names are not. I generally defer to marketing on this

* Retrieves timing data from previous test runs.
* Uses the previous test run times as a heuristic to guide the order that tests are enqueued. Longer tests will be run earlier in the process.
* Tunes the size of the test batches run by each node to ensure the workload is evenly balanced.

This approach prevents slower nodes from extending the job runtime while other nodes have finished. All nodes continue to run tests until the entire test suite has been completed.

=== Test impact analysis

> Test impact analysis identifies which tests need to run based on the files that changed in your checked out code, stored as impact data for future test runs. The system works in two phases:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Test impact analysis identifies which tests need to run based on the files that changed in your checked out code. Analysis results are stored as impact data for future test runs. The system works in two phases:
```

The analysis phase typically runs slower because it executes tests individually with coverage instrumentation. However, this one-time cost enables much faster test execution on branches using selection mode.

[mermaid]
----
flowchart LR
    discover(Discover \n A B C D E F G H I J)
    discover --> tia(Test Impact Analysis \n A B C D E)
    tia --> split1(Node 1 \n A... B..\n.........)
    tia --> split2(Node 2 \n C...... \n .......)
    tia --> split3(Node 3 \n D...... \n .. E...)
    subgraph "Dynamic Test Splitting"
    split1
    split2
    split3
    end
----

[#getting-started]
== 1. Getting started
By the end of this section:

* You will have installed the Smarter Testing tooling locally
* Configured your `.circleci/test-suites.yml` to discover and run your tests.

=== 1.1 Install the testsuite plugin locally

The testsuite plugin can be used both locally and in CI. We recommend getting started locally for the faster

> feedback loop.

Reviewer 3: Yeah I wasn't sure about this either but then testsuite is run as a command right? `circleci run testsuite` thats why I figured monospaced makes sense. I am happy either way as long as consistent

- Install the latest CircleCI CLI
- Install the latest testsuite CLI plugin

> TIP: The testsuite CLI plugin is already available for use in CI containers, there is no need to install it.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
TIP: The `testsuite` CLI plugin is already available for use in CircleCI Docker containers so there is no need to install it in your jobs.
```

+
Verify with:
+
[source,console]
----
$ sha256sum -c <(echo "f189936b32bae5cde22a7522dc58bd4e988c1384f690801c4cc88dfebf90319c  ./circleci-testsuite.gz")
----

Linux ARM::
https://circleci-binary-releases.s3.amazonaws.com/circleci-cli-plugins/circleci-testsuite/1.0.15108-d839eb2/linux/arm/circleci-testsuite.gz[Download]
+
Verify with:
+
[source,console]
----
$ sha256sum -c <(echo "b84ccd76ddb4bad1e8226381e308f9a9d95e2314cd3676fcdaffcf234446fcd5  ./circleci-testsuite.gz")
----

Linux ARM64::
https://circleci-binary-releases.s3.amazonaws.com/circleci-cli-plugins/circleci-testsuite/1.0.15108-d839eb2/linux/arm64/circleci-testsuite.gz[Download]
+
Verify with:
+
[source,console]
----
$ sha256sum -c <(echo "a5770f0c964b434df3560358836fa2401f526379e84aac2cd6c7946180ed1ce6  ./circleci-testsuite.gz")
----

Windows AMD64::
https://circleci-binary-releases.s3.amazonaws.com/circleci-cli-plugins/circleci-testsuite/1.0.15108-d839eb2/windows/amd64/circleci-testsuite.exe.gz[Download]
+
Verify with:
+
[source,console]
----
$ sha256sum -c <(echo "ca0f395b1ffeca557428a30cc405ad193fe681792822cfae73c7c7c813687c0c  ./circleci-testsuite.exe.gz")
----
====

> After downloading the plugin and verifying the checksum:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
After downloading the plugin and verifying the checksum, complete the following steps:
```

. Decompress the binary
. Set the execute bit

> . Move it to a directory on your shell's `$PATH`

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
. Decompress the binary.
. Set the execute bit.
. Move it to a directory on your shell's `$PATH`.
```

Author: Done (I think? Probably got the source-in-list formatting wrong)

[source,console]
----
$ gunzip circleci-testsuite.gz
$ chmod u+x circleci-testsuite
$ mv circleci-testsuite "${HOME}/bin/"
----

=== 1.2 Configure the discover command
TIP: The `circleci run testsuite` CLI tooling must be run from your repository root directory. The commands run as part of the test suite will also be run from your repository root directory, and should not use `cd` to change the working directory.

Smarter Testing operates on "test atoms".

A "test atom" is a single runnable unit that exercises one or more tests, depending on the specific test runner being used. for example `go test pkg/foo`, `jest index.test.ts`, `./gradlew test --tests "TestMethod"`

The `discover` command finds all test atoms for a given test suite. The stdout of this command is split on both newlines and whitespace, each token is treated as a test atom.

The `discover` command should not execute any tests.

Every line of stdout will be interpreted as test atoms, any tool that prints metadata in the stdout will need to be suppressed.

It may be useful to run the `discover` command in your shell to examine the output.

> .Create a `.circleci/test-suites.yml` file in the project root and populate the `discover` command

Reviewer: It feels like there’s a missing transition between the explanation of what a discovery is and the steps for configuring the discovery command. Adding a brief connector would help the flow.

[tabs]
====
Vitest::
+
[source,yaml]
----
# .circleci/test-suites.yml
---
name: ci tests
discover: vitest list --filesOnly
run: |
  echo "running: <<test.atoms>>" | tr ' ' '\n'
----

Jest::
+
[source,yaml]
----
# .circleci/test-suites.yml
---
name: ci tests
discover: jest --listTests
run: |
  echo "running: <<test.atoms>>" | tr ' ' '\n'
----

Yarn with Jest::
+
[source,yaml]
----
# .circleci/test-suites.yml
---
name: ci tests
discover: yarn --silent test --listTests
run: |
  echo "running: <<test.atoms>>" | tr ' ' '\n'
----

pytest::
+
[source,yaml]
----
# .circleci/test-suites.yml
---
name: ci tests
discover: find ./tests -type f -name 'test*.py'
run: |
  echo "running: <<test.atoms>>" | tr ' ' '\n'
----

Go::
+
[source,yaml]
----
# .circleci/test-suites.yml
---
name: ci tests
discover: go list -f '{{ if or (len .TestGoFiles) (len .XTestGoFiles) }} {{ .ImportPath }} {{end}}' ./...
run: |
  echo "running: <<test.atoms>>" | tr ' ' '\n'
----

Shell commands::
+
[source,yaml]
----
# .circleci/test-suites.yml
---
name: ci tests
discover: find test/ -type f -name '*_test.ts'
run: |
  echo "running: <<test.atoms>>" | tr ' ' '\n'
----
====

> Run the test suite and confirm that the `discover` command found the test atoms you expect:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
. Run the test suite and confirm that the `discover` command found the test atoms you expect:

```

Suite Configuration:

name: ci tests
discover:
    command: vitest list --filesOnly
    shell: /bin/sh
run:
    command: |-
        echo 'running: <<test.atoms>>' | tr ' ' '
        '
    shell: /bin/sh

Discovering...
Discovered 2 tests in 29ms

Selecting tests...
Selecting all tests, no impact analysis available
Selected 2 tests, Skipped 0 tests in 0s

Timing data is not present.
Sorted tests in 0s

Running 2 tests
   echo 'running: src/pages/dashboard/Dashboard.test.tsx src/pages/dashboard/CreateProjectButton.test.tsx' | tr ' ' '\n'
running:
src/pages/dashboard/Dashboard.test.tsx
src/pages/dashboard/CreateProjectButton.test.tsx
Ran 2 tests in 34ms

Analysis not configured
Not updating test impact data, analysis not enabled
----

=== 1.3 Configure the run command

The `run` command executes the test atoms discovered by the `discover` command using a test runner. The `run` command is the same command you use to launch your test runner locally.

Make sure that the command stores JUnit results, and that it is passed a list of test atoms to run, for example:
[source,console]
----
$ vitest run --reporter=junit \
             --outputFile="test-reports/tests.xml" \

>              --bail 0 \

Reviewer: Do we need the `--bail 0` in the example? We probably should add some explanation on what it's doing

"Discovered" test atoms can be specified in one of two ways:

* Use the template variable `<< test.atoms >>` in the `run` command. This will be replaced with a space-separated list of test atoms to run.
* If the template variable is not found in the `run` command, the command's stdin will be a newline-separated list of test atoms.

The template variable `<< outputs.junit >>` is used in the `run` command so Smarter Testing can interpret test results. The location of the test results should be defined in the `outputs` map so that it can be uploaded in CI with the `store_test_results` builtin command.

Making these changes to the command above gives:
[source,console]
----
$ vitest run --reporter=junit \
             --outputFile="<< outputs.junit >>" \
             --bail 0 \
             << test.atoms >>
----

. Update the `.circleci/test-suites.yml` with the run command.
. In order to upload test results in your CI jobs, the location of the JUnit output file path also needs to be set in the test suite configuration. Set `outputs.junit` in `.circleci/test-suites.yml` with your preferred JUnit output file path.

> 

Reviewer 3: just to bring the following tabs into this numbered step

----

Yarn with Jest::
+
[source,yaml]
----
# .circleci/test-suites.yml
---
name: ci tests
discover: yarn --silent test --listTests
run: JEST_JUNIT_OUTPUT_FILE="<< outputs.junit >>" yarn test --runInBand --reporters=jest-junit --bail << test.atoms >>
outputs:
  junit: test-reports/tests.xml
----

pytest::
+
[source,yaml]
----
# .circleci/test-suites.yml
---
name: ci tests
discover: find ./tests -type f -name 'test*.py'
run: pytest --disable-pytest-warnings --no-header --quiet --tb=short --junit-xml="<< outputs.junit >>" << test.atoms >>
outputs:
  junit: test-reports/tests.xml
----

Go::
+
[source,yaml]
----
# .circleci/test-suites.yml
---
name: ci tests
discover: go list -f '{{ if or (len .TestGoFiles) (len .XTestGoFiles) }} {{ .ImportPath }} {{end}}' ./...
run: go test -race -count=1 << test.atoms >>
outputs:
  junit: test-reports/tests.xml
----

Go with gotestsum::
+
[source,yaml]
----
# .circleci/test-suites.yml
---
name: ci tests
discover: go list -f '{{ if or (len .TestGoFiles) (len .XTestGoFiles) }} {{ .ImportPath }} {{end}}' ./...
run: go tool gotestsum --junitfile="<< outputs.junit >>" -- -race -count=1 << test.atoms >>
outputs:
  junit: test-reports/tests.xml
----
====

> Run the test suite and confirm that the `run` command runs the test atoms you expect:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
. Run the test suite and confirm that the `run` command runs the test atoms you expect:
+
```

Found 127 files impacting test src/pages/dashboard/Dashboard.test.tsx

Running impact analysis for src/pages/dashboard/CreateProjectButton.test.tsx
   vitest run --coverage.enabled \
           --coverage.all=false \
           --coverage.reporter=lcov \
           --coverage.provider=v8 \
           --coverage.reportsDirectory="$(dirname /tmp/test-suite-outputs.lcov-3417803461/outputs.lcov)" \
           --silent \
           --bail 0 \
           src/pages/dashboard/CreateProjectButton.test.tsx \
           && cat "$(dirname /tmp/test-suite-outputs.lcov-3417803461/outputs.lcov)"/*.info > /tmp/test-suite-outputs.lcov-3417803461/outputs.lcov

 RUN  v4.0.8 /home/circleci/project
      Coverage enabled with v8

 ✓ src/pages/dashboard/CreateProjectButton.test.tsx (1 test) 43ms

 Test Files  1 passed (1)
      Tests  1 passed (1)
   Start at  13:48:54
   Duration  13.02s (transform 708ms, setup 540ms, collect 1.4s, tests 43ms, environment 356ms, prepare 29ms)

Found 127 files impacting test src/pages/dashboard/CreateProjectButton.test.tsx

Analyzed 2 tests in 23.357s
Updated test impact data in 23.501s
----

[NOTE]
====
*Using multiple test suites in a single repository*

> By default Smarter Testing uses per-repository test impact analysis data. If you have multiple test suites in a single repository, the impact analysis data for each test suite may conflict with each other.

Reviewer: We should elaborate in which cases they would conflict

run: go test -race -count=1 << test.atoms >>
analysis: go test -coverprofile="<< outputs.go-coverage >>" -cover -coverpkg ./... << test.atoms >>
outputs:
  junit: test-reports/tests.xml
options:
  test-impact-analysis: true
  test-analysis-duration: 15
----

Go with gotestsum::
+
[source,yaml]
----
# .circleci/test-suites.yml
---
name: ci tests
discover: go list -f '{{ if or (len .TestGoFiles) (len .XTestGoFiles) }} {{ .ImportPath }} {{end}}' ./...
run: go tool gotestsum --junitfile="<< outputs.junit >>" -- -race -count=1 << test.atoms >>
analysis: go tool gotestsum -- -coverprofile="<< outputs.go-coverage >>" -cover -coverpkg ./... << test.atoms >>
outputs:
  junit: test-reports/tests.xml
options:
  test-impact-analysis: true
  test-analysis-duration: 15
----
====

Run analysis, this will run until all the tests are analysed or for approximately the `test-analysis-duration` timeout you set in your test suite configuration. If the analysis command exits because it runs out of time, you can run the test suite again, the process will pick up from where it left off.
[source,console]
----
$ circleci run testsuite "ci tests" --local --test-selection=none --test-analysis=impacted
----

> Once the analysis is complete, modify a source file and then run the test-suite. Look for the section starting `Selecting tests...` (some of the output from the command below has been elided):

Reviewer: We could be more explicit here and suggest modifying a test file that is actually exercised by one of the tests. This will make the instruction clearer.

> Once the analysis is complete, modify a source file and then run the test-suite. Look for the section starting `Selecting tests...` (some of the output from the command below has been elided):

Reviewer: Waiting for the full analysis can create a long feedback loop. Since the goal is just to check if this is set, we could suggest the user modify a test impacted by one of the tests shown in the discovery output. That way, the file will be selected while others are skipped. What do you think?

. Make sure that `.circleci/test-suites.yml` is checked in to your repository.
. Update your `.circleci/config.yml` to call the `circleci run testsuite "ci tests"` command instead of your regular test command.
. Push the change to your VCS.

E.g. if your CircleCI test job was:
[source,yaml]
----
version: 2.1
jobs:
  test:
    executor: node-with-service
    steps:
      - setup
      - run: vitest run --reporter=junit --outputFile="test-reports/tests.xml" --bail 0
      - store_test_results:
          path: test-reports
----

You would change it to:
[source,yaml]
----
version: 2.1
jobs:
  test:
    executor: node-with-service
    steps:
      - setup
      - run: circleci run testsuite "ci tests"
      - store_test_results:
          # This directory must match the directory of `outputs.junit` in your
          # test-suites.yml
          path: test-reports
----

Since there is no test impact analysis data stored in CircleCI for your test suite, all the tests will be selected and run when you push to CI. Confirm that the tests execute as expected.

TIP: It can be easier to debug issues with your test suite configuration in CI if you initially run the job without parallelism.

> The analysis phase runs on the default branch, you can pre-populate the test impact analysis data before merging by temporarily adding the `--test-analysis=impacted` CLI flag to the test suite invocation:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
By default, the analysis phase runs on the default branch. To pre-populate test impact analysis data from a feature branch, temporarily add the `--test-analysis=impacted` CLI flag when invoking the test suite.
```

[source,yaml]
----
version: 2.1
jobs:
  test:
    executor: node-with-service
    steps:
      - setup
      # override test selection and analysis defaults to perform analysis on a
      # feature branch
      - run: circleci run testsuite "ci tests" --test-selection=none --test-analysis=impacted
      - store_test_results:
          path: test-reports
----

> Analysis will be limited to approximately 15 minutes due to `options.test-analysis-duration` in the test suite configuration. If analysis isn't completing within those 15 minutes, you can remove `options.test-analysis-duration` to allow the process to run for as long as it needs.

Reviewer: How likely is it that a customer's first analysis will take under 15 minutes? If it's unlikely, we could just add a step to remove the 15-minute limit.
Another option is to keep the 15-minute limit and add guidance that users can speed up analysis by:
- Increasing parallelism
- Using a scheduled pipeline

`full-test-run-paths: []`

|`test-analysis-duration`
|null
|The maximum duration test analysis will run for in minutes. +
Any remaining tests will be analysed the next time test analysis is run.

|`impact-key`
|`"default"`
|Group relevant impact data together using a matching key within the same project.
|===
--

The following flags are available to be defined on the `circleci run testsuite` command.

[#cli-flags]
[.table-scroll]
--
[cols=3*, options="header"]
|===
|Flag|Default|Description

|`--test-analysis=all\|impacted\|none`
|On branch `main`, impacted. +
On all other branches, `none`
a| * `all` analyzes all discovered tests, used to override any existing impact data. +
* `impacted` analyzes only tests impacted by a change, used to refresh impact data. +
* `none` skips analysis.

|`--test-selection=all\|impacted\|none`
|On branch `main`, `all`. +
On all other branches, `impacted`
a| * `all` selects and runs all discovered tests, used to run the full test suite. +
* `impacted` selects and runs only the tests impacted by a change. +
* `none` skips running tests, used to skip straight to analysis.
|===
--

== 5. Optional configuration

> === 5.1 Use the `file-mapper` command when test atoms are *not* file names

Reviewer: We should probably mention this step earlier. Is it possible to go through local onboarding without it?

NOTE: Skip this step if the test atoms discovered by your test suite are file names. This step is only necessary when test atoms are something other than file names.

TIP: One language that requires a `file-mapper` command is Go, since a test atom is a Go package which may be comprised of several test files.

When your test atoms are something other than file names, Smarter Testing needs a way to determine which files store the implementation of each test atom.

> The `file-mapper` command is a command that maps a test atom to a file. The `file-mapper` command is used during analysis and test selection to ensure that a test is impacted by the test source code.

Reviewer 4: I'm not sure if these 2 sentences were clear to me on what the purpose of file-mapper is and why it's needed. 

Based on my knowledge, this was how I understood the feature:
File mapper is a command that maps a test atom to test files part of that atom (ex. files inside a package).
During analysis, it records which test files belong to each test atom. During selection ....

I'm still a little confused on how it exactly gets used during selection but I think its good to include in docs. During selection, does file-mapper get used to figure out which atoms to select based on new test files, or is it also used to detect changes to existing test files that are already in the impact data?
